Deployment models - clarifications and fixes (#8044)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/index.md

Are all clusters going to be connected into a single {{< gloss >}}multicluster{{< /gloss >}}
service mesh or will they be federated into a {{< gloss >}}multi-mesh{{< /gloss >}} deployment?

## Definition of a Mesh in Istio

Before answering the questions above, it is imperative to understand the definition of a `mesh` in Istio.

> _A mesh is one single administrative domain, consisting of one single shared root CA trusted by 

Reviewer: A mesh can actually have multiple roots, so long as all clusters trust the same set of roots it is a single mesh.

I'm not even sure how to define a mesh anymore, since it reality Istio is really flexible and even service discovery doesn't have to be the same in every cluster.

But I think administrative domain / shared set of trusted roots / single service discovery / service naming domain is kind of the right direction?

Reviewer 2: Is this the right place for this definition? We already have [What is a Service Mesh](https://istio.io/latest/docs/concepts/what-is-istio/#what-is-a-service-mesh) ... maybe this re-work should go there instead and we could link to it?

Reviewer 3: The `What is a Service Mesh` section of the concepts is very high level, so I don't think we want this there, but I do think we should clean up the [service mesh glossary entry](https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/reference/glossary/#service-mesh) should say this, and here we can refer to and highlight the single admin domain part

all workloads in the mesh, irrespective of the clusters or control planes in the system._

> All of these questions, among others, represent independent dimensions of configuration for a `single Istio mesh` deployment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Deploying a `single Istio mesh` involves three independent dimensions of configuration:
```

## Control plane models

An Istio mesh uses the {{< gloss >}}control plane{{< /gloss >}} to configure all
communication between workload instances within the mesh. At one extreme, you can choose
to deploy one control plane per cluster in the mesh, while at the other extreme,

> you can host one single shared control plane for all clusters in the mesh.

Reviewer 2: nit: suggest rephrasing to `you can host one control plane that is shared by all clusters in the mesh`

Reviewer 4: Should we add external control plane here as well?

Reviewer 2: Yeah I think that makes sense. We can probably just add that in a follow-on PR.

_Note: Each control plane will only honor configurations (such as Gateways, VirtualServices, etc.)

> that are present in its local Kubernetes cluster. If you wish to apply a configuration to all workloads in the mesh

Reviewer: This is no longer true with the external control plane stuff, there is a concept of a config cluster where an external control plane can pull its config. So we should maybe add a parenthetical that mentions that external control planes pull their config from a single config cluster.

Reviewer 4: +1, local k8s cluster is really our new 'config cluster' now, as it doesn't have to be local.

across control planes, it is your responsibility to replicate the configuration to the

> Kubernetes clusters associated with each control plane._

Reviewer 4: Think this `it is your responsibility to replicate the configuration` - do you mean istio config or k8s objects for services?  I assume it is later for shared control plane and perhaps both for replicated control plane... this can generate confusion to users.

> ### Shared control plane models

Reviewer: I think this should move below the single cluster simple case and go right before "Multicluster deployments can also share control plane instances."

A single cluster mesh isn't really a shared control plane.

Reviewer 3: Even if you move this header after the single cluster simple case, it still isn't appropriate because the external control plane example, later on, is also not a shared control plane model. Do we really need this heading at all?

Reviewer 2: +1 for removing the heading

    caption="A service mesh with a primary and a remote cluster"
    >}}

> Instead of running shared control planes in primary clusters inside the mesh, a service mesh composed entirely of

Reviewer 2: remove `shared`

Reviewer 3: Agree with @nmittler. You could have a mesh with multiple primary clusters, so there's no sharing in that case.

temporary outage), the workloads will continue to function with the existing sidecar configuration and
will re-attempt to connect to the in-cluster control plane periodically.

This model affords the following benefits:

- Highest level of availability: If a control plane becomes unavailable, the scope of
  the outage is limited to only that cluster and the workloads within it.

- Maximum configuration isolation: You can make configuration changes in one cluster without impacting
  workloads deployed in any other cluster.

### Availability vs Config Isolation

The following list ranks control plane deployment examples by availability and configuration isolation:

- One control plane per region or a single global control plane (**lowest availability**, **lowest isolation**)
- Multiple control planes per region
- One control plane per cluster (**highest availability**, **highest isolation**)

## Mesh models

Istio supports having all of your services in a
{{< gloss "service mesh" >}}single mesh{{< /gloss >}}, or federating multiple meshes
together, which is also known as {{< gloss >}}multi-mesh{{< /gloss >}}.

### Single mesh

> 

Reviewer 4: For single mesh, if clusters have different trust domain for each cluster, why aren't those multi-meshes?  Seems it is intuitive to use trust domain to scope the boundary of mesh.

Author: Why does trust domain (an opaque string) have to be tied to the CA or mesh? Intuitive is very subjective. To me, it is unintuitive to run single Istio for many clusters or allow pods in one cluster to access internal k8s services of another cluster :). Yet, we have many formulations of this (single/independent/central control planes). The trust domain falls under the same umbrella. You can use a single global trust domain for entire mesh (like central istiod) or many trust domains (one per cluster). Its just essentially build your own adventure, like the rest of this doc.

Reviewer 4: Maybe it doesn't... What I'm trying to understand is how can I differentiate if this is single mesh or multi-meshes, based on your latest doc. From our prior doc, my understanding is that it is based on trust domains and whether admin needs to federate trust bundles.  Now, I don't know, and that is the confusion I had.

The simplest Istio deployment is a single mesh. A single mesh can span
[one or more clusters](#cluster-models) and [one or more networks](#network-models).
All workloads in a mesh share a common certificate authority. You can choose to use a single shared

>   trust domain or a separate trust domain for each cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  [trust domain](https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/master/standards/SPIFFE-ID.md#21-trust-domain) or a separate trust domain for each cluster.
```

If you use a single shared trust domain, a service account in a given namespace is globally unique - i.e. if
two clusters `cluster-1` and `cluster-2` have the same service account `foo` in namespace `ns`, they will be
treated the same for purposes of security. With a trust domain for each cluster, there are no
restrictions on the uniqueness of service accounts, and namespaces. You can apply enforcement

> policies that allow or deny all traffic from one cluster (irrespective of the namespace/service) to another.

Reviewer 4: @rshriram @frankbu what are the examples of enforcement policies here?  Istio RBAC or network policies?  I assume Istio RBAC doesn't work across clusters when there are multiple trust domains.

Author: as i mentioned earlier, it does and we use it in production.

Reviewer 4: Can we clarify it is Istio authZ policy (vs a general enforcement policies) if that is what you are referring to here?

Note: we don't have examples for this at istio.io or in our github.  So this could be perceived as unsupported.

Author: done

### Multiple meshes

Multiple mesh deployments result from {{< gloss >}}mesh federation{{< /gloss >}}, with the following capabilities:

- Organizational boundaries: lines of business.
- Potential for cross vendor meshes to communicate with each
  other if the trust bundles are setup properly.

You can enable inter-mesh communication with {{< gloss >}}mesh federation{{</gloss >}}.
When federating, each mesh can expose a set of services and identities, which all participating meshes can recognize.

{{< image width="50%"

>     link="multi-mesh.svg"

Reviewer 4: Confused about this diagram, how is this different than single mesh multiple trust domains mentioned earlier where it also says `You can apply enforcement
policies that allow or deny all traffic from one cluster (irrespective of the namespace/service) to another`

Reviewer 4: I realize you may not have changed diagrams... you reshaped what is single mesh that could include multiple trust domains, which made me think this diagram isn't only applied to multi-meshes based on the latest doc thus the confusion.

    alt="Multiple service meshes"
    title="Multi-mesh"
    caption="Multiple service meshes"
    >}}

When federating two meshes that do not share the same
{{< gloss >}}trust domain{{< /gloss >}}, you must
{{< gloss "mesh federation">}}federate{{< /gloss >}}
{{< gloss >}}identity{{< /gloss >}} and **trust bundles** between them. See the

> section on [Multiple Trust Domains](#trust-between-meshes) for an overview.

Reviewer 4: Here we are referring to multiple trust domains to a link that is trust between meshes.  but earlier the doc says you could have multiple trust domains for a single mesh (each cluster has its own trust domain).

Author: Why does trust domain (an opaque string) have to be tied to the CA or mesh? Intuitive is very subjective. To me, it is unintuitive to run single Istio for many clusters or allow pods in one cluster to access internal k8s services of another cluster :). Yet, we have many formulations of this (single/independent/central control planes). The trust domain falls under the same umbrella. You can use a single global trust domain for entire mesh (like central istiod) or many trust domains (one per cluster). Its just essentially build your own adventure, like the rest of this doc.

Author: good catch.. will remove

A cloud vendor's {{< gloss >}}managed control plane{{< /gloss >}} is a typical example of an external control plane.

> For high availability, you should deploy one shared control plane in each zone/region or sets of clusters, and

Reviewer 2: remove `shared` ... that's not a term we want to use anymore.

  the outage is limited to only that cluster and the workloads within it.

- Maximum configuration isolation: You can make configuration changes in one cluster without impacting
  workloads deployed in any other cluster.

### Availability vs Config Isolation

The following list ranks control plane deployment examples by availability and configuration isolation:

- One control plane per region or a single global control plane (**lowest availability**, **lowest isolation**)
- Multiple control planes per region
- One control plane per cluster (**highest availability**, **highest isolation**)

## Mesh models

Istio supports having all of your services in a
{{< gloss "service mesh" >}}single mesh{{< /gloss >}}, or federating multiple meshes
together, which is also known as {{< gloss >}}multi-mesh{{< /gloss >}}.

### Single mesh

The simplest Istio deployment is a single mesh. A single mesh can span
[one or more clusters](#cluster-models) and [one or more networks](#network-models).
All workloads in a mesh share a common certificate authority. You can choose to use a single shared
  trust domain or a separate trust domain for each cluster.

>   

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

This model affords the following benefits:

- Improved availability: If a control plane becomes unavailable, the scope of

>   the outage is limited to only that control plane, and the workloads in clusters managed by that control plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the outage is limited to only workloads in clusters managed by that control plane.
```

Reviewer 4: is there workload outage when istio config/resources aren't changed?  Seems odd we would highlight workloads outage here.

- Improved configuration isolation: Configuration changes in one control plane affects only
the workloads in clusters managed by this control plane.

> #### Failover in Shared Control Planes

Reviewer 2: Rephrase to just `Failover in Control Planes`

Author: as I said, I dont know if the failover works or is supported. It just seemed hand wavy. I can use replicated or shared. But its what it is.

Reviewer 4: would be good to remove this before we have steps and validation.  Last time we discussed, i think mainly @costinm knows how to do this.

> You can improve shared control plane availability through fail over. When a shared control

Reviewer 2: Does failover across cluster boundaries actually work today?

Author: I have absolutely no clue if it works. But it was listed in the doc (you can actually see it live on our site)!. So I am simply repeating that.. Heck it even has diagrams!

Reviewer 2: I'd be in favor of removing it from the doc.

@smawson WDYT?

    caption="A service mesh after a control plane instance fails"
    >}}

> ### Independent Control Planes

Reviewer 2: This term has not been defined or agreed upon. We probably shouldn't use it. In the old terminology, this would have effectively been "replicated". We had previously considered using the term `independent control planes` to represent the case where both are primaries and there is no cross-cluster load balancing between the clusters

Reviewer 4: I do like independent control planes way better than replicated control planes :)

Reviewer 2: The problem is that it's not defined and we haven't reached agreement on the term. There doesn't really seem to be a need for a new term. We could just as easily call this section `Control plane per cluster`.

> You can also deploy a control plane per cluster, with a shared root CA. Each cluster's control plane

Reviewer: I'd like to reword this a tiny bit to make it more part of a continuum, so rather than "also"something like:

For maximum availability and configuration isolation you can deploy a control plane in each cluster.

We don't need to mention shared root CA since that is the same for shared control planes and independent control planes.

Reviewer 4: +1, the key is config isolation.  Perhaps max availability as well.  (especially if we remove shared control plane with failover).

manages only the workloads in its own cluster. If the control plane is unavailable (due to upgrade or
temporary outage), the workloads will continue to function with the existing sidecar configuration and

> will re-attempt to connect to the local control plane periodically.

Reviewer 2: replace `local` with something like `in-cluster`

Reviewer 4: Note: in this model, the control plane could be external as well.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that's true. It sounds like the description here is specifically regarding in-cluster control planes.

This model affords the following benefits:

- Highest level of availability: If a control plane becomes unavailable, the scope of
  the outage is limited to only that cluster and the workloads within it.

- Maximum configuration isolation: You can make configuration changes in one cluster without impacting
  workloads deployed in any other cluster.

> The following list ranks control plane deployment examples by availability, configuration isolation:

Reviewer: Maybe a new section since this isn't part of independent control planes.

> The following list ranks control plane deployment examples by availability, configuration isolation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following list ranks control plane deployment examples by availability and configuration isolation:
```

> - One control plane per region (**lowest availability**, **lowest isolation**)

Reviewer: One before this is a single global control plane.

- Multiple control planes per region
- One control plane per zone
- Multiple control planes per zone
- One control plane per cluster (**highest availability**, **highest isolation**)

> 

Reviewer 4: What is confusing here is cluster can be multi-zone as well.  So users could be deploy control plane per zone in a multi-zone cluster.   In fact, we recommend users to use large clusters with zone HA - https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/best-practices/deployment/#deploy-across-multiple-availability-zones

Reviewer 4: Also, I could have combination of these... i can have multiple control planes per region, and within each region, i have have one cp per zone.

Author: fixed

> ## Mesh models

Reviewer 2: Can we move Mesh models back to where it was? It's built on top of `trust models`, so I'd like to see that come first.

Author: yes but trust models is also talking about multi-mesh.. So its chicken and egg.

Reviewer 2: Then can we move it back for diff purposes at least? We can reorganize in a follow-up if we think it's necessary.

Istio supports having all of your services in a
{{< gloss "service mesh" >}}single mesh{{< /gloss >}}, or federating multiple meshes
together, which is also known as {{< gloss >}}multi-mesh{{< /gloss >}}.

### Single mesh

The simplest Istio deployment is a single mesh. A single mesh can span
[one or more clusters](#cluster-models) and [one or more networks](#network-models).
All workloads in a mesh share a common certificate authority or the same trust
domain depending on the following situations:

- If you are using a vendor hosted CA that is shared across different customers,

>   then it is imperative to use a single trust domain for the entire mesh, as the

Reviewer: This is not necessarily true (for example google supports a single mesh with multiple trust domains using our managed CA).

Author: does each mesh have its own trust bundle ?

Reviewer 4: do we really want to put vendor statement in istio.io docs here?

Author: this is addressing the google CA thing.. as this restriction in google CA is now making the security people to suggest that each cluster should have its own trust domain (and yet share a root CA)

Author: and still be different meshes!!!!!

  root CA across different customers could be the same (i.e. the vendor's CA itself).

> - If you have your own root CA for all your clusters, you can choose to use a single shared

Reviewer: We're more general than this, we can support multiple roots and multiple trust domains for each root. Or at least that was the design...

Author: Yes but the implementation is not there. there is quite a bit of handwaving to say 'make sure to replicate trust bundles everywhere' using some SPIFFE design doc but nothing to say how to keep these bundles updated as you add more clusters/CAs. That is the reason i chose to keep this concept doc concrete as I had one end user ask me today on how to accomplish the trust bundle replication described in the doc.

Listing in concepts but having no implementation feels a bit like rhetorical trick :P.

>   trust domain or a separate trust domain for each cluster.

Reviewer 4: Do we support separate trust domain for a single mesh?  Any examples?  Looking at our replicated control plane doc, we are using same root CA, and configuring auto_passthrough on the cluster gateways, so it is still single trust domain imho.

Reviewer 4: Or you consider our replicated control plane is different trust domains with same root CA?

Author: we certainly support separate trust domains per cluster but with same CA. Heck, we are running this in production at several customer sites. its there in our docs - some obscure trust domain flag/field that people can set at control plane level.

Reviewer 4: Thanks found it in meshconfig trust domain.

> If you use a single shared trust domain, a service in a given namespace is globally unique - i.e. if

Reviewer: This should talk specifically about service accounts or service identities, not just services.

Also we support aliasing so even if two clusters have the same service account foo in namespace ns but are in different trust domains, they _may_ be treated the same if the trust domains are aliased.

Author: Right, thats different trust domains. the sentence is about single trust domain

### Multiple meshes

Multiple mesh deployments result from {{< gloss >}}mesh federation{{< /gloss >}}, with the following capabilities:

- Organizational boundaries: lines of business.
- Potential for cross vendor meshes to communicate with each
  other if the trust bundles are setup properly.

You can enable inter-mesh communication with {{< gloss >}}mesh federation{{</gloss >}}.
When federating, each mesh can expose a set of services and identities, which all participating meshes can recognize.

{{< image width="50%"
    link="multi-mesh.svg"
    alt="Multiple service meshes"
    title="Multi-mesh"
    caption="Multiple service meshes"
    >}}

When federating two meshes that do not share the same
{{< gloss >}}trust domain{{< /gloss >}}, you must
{{< gloss "mesh federation">}}federate{{< /gloss >}}
{{< gloss >}}identity{{< /gloss >}} and **trust bundles** between them. See the
section on [Multiple Trust Domains](#trust-between-meshes) for an overview.

## Identity and trust models

When a workload instance is created within a service mesh, Istio assigns the
workload an {{< gloss >}}identity{{< /gloss >}}.

> The Certificate Authority (CA) in the control plane creates and signs the certificates used to verify

Reviewer 2: This wording seems to imply `citadel` (i.e. part of istiod). Was there some motivation for adding this?

    caption="A service mesh with two namespaces and an exposed service"
    >}}

### Cluster Tenancy

You can use the cluster as the unit of isolation in a mesh by giving each team
a dedicated cluster, with its [own control plane](#independent-control-plane) allowing
them to manage their own configurations. Alternatively, if you can ensure that namespaces
are globally unique across clusters, you can use a shared control plane.

> ### Mesh Tenancy

Reviewer 2: So it appears that you removed the `Mesh models` section in favor of using mesh as a unit of tenancy. I'm not entirely against this as it does seem to simplify this a bit.

@smawson thoughts?

    caption="Multiple service meshes with certificate authorities"
    >}}

> ## Isolating teams within the mesh

Reviewer: I think we should talk about multi-mesh here too, so re-title as Isolating teams with Istio or something.

Reviewer 2: Isn't this just a rename of `Tenancy Models`? I'm not sure this is an improvement ... or am I missing something?

> Istio does not have a formally defined notion of tenancy. However, you can achieve a great

Reviewer: Is this really true? Our notion of tenancy was defined in this doc, which is that namespaces are used for soft tenancy. Also we have lots of code that helps make namespace isolation work. So I'm not sure we don't have a formal notion of tenancy. Maybe we can just drop that first sentence.

You can achieve a great level of isolation across different teams ...

level of isolation across different teams through the use of different namespaces or even separate clusters.
Such soft tenancy models can be used to satisfy the following organizational requirements for isolation:

- Security
- Policy
- Capacity
- Cost
- Performance

Istio supports two types of soft-tenancy models:

- [Namespace isolation](#namespace-isolation)
- [Cluster isolation](#cluster-isolation)

> ### Namespace isolation

Reviewer 2: Why is `isolation` preferred to just `tenancy`?

Author: Because we dont have a formal tenancy concept. No one knows what a tenant is. Docs have been flying around about this "tenancy" thing. Isolation != tenancy. We shouldn't oversell this bad :)

Reviewer 2: Still I think I'd rather keep the tenancy docs as-is until we finalize the new conceptual model for tenancy. I'm not sure this rename is an improvement.

    caption="A service mesh with two namespaces and an exposed service"
    >}}

> ### Cluster isolation

Reviewer: This used to be more about using meshes as tenancy (it was probably mistitled). 

I think we want to do more work to make cluster tenancy actually work well, and also think we should talk about using multiple meshes as tenancy.

Author: what does it even mean? and why does it matter to a single Istio mesh? I mean the persona doing this is viewing the doc from the perspective of a single mesh, based on what is possible today in Istio. We dont have examples/guides for multi-mesh or guides explaining how to do trust bundle updates, replication, etc.

Reviewer: The target audience is a platform admin. They need to know how to deal with tenancy within their platform. One option is cluster tenancy, which doesn't quite work right by being overly tied to control plane deployments, but is something we should work on improving. Another option is mesh tenancy. We should discuss these models here, if we're going to discuss one model that doesn't quite work right we should discuss the other too :)

Author: Okay changed to cluster tenancy and also added mesh tenancy
